# Composties_Calculator
Simple Android App for calculating composites 



	There are several online resources and software packages available that help users calculate the thickness and strength of composite materials. For this final project I have decided to capture some of the basic functionality of these resources in an offline, portable environment. While this application will certainly not replace those resources, its objective of a quick and accessible tool should be accomplished. 

The Design and Layout
	The first thing the user will see using the composites calculator app is a loading screen. In an Android application this is called a splash screen. This loading screen will have its own XML layout and its own java class called SplashScreen.java (Tamada, 2017). While currently this application is pretty small and doesn't have much to load it will allow for future updates without a major change in feel of the application. The logo is displayed for a certain amount of time to give the app a professional feel. In the future this can be changed or updated very quickly by updating or adding files to the drawable folder in the res file structure. 
The Calculations Page
	One of the functions and the main topic of this application is to calculate the thickness of your composite part. This information is very helpful for the average designer or engineer of a composite part as the thickness of an object is directly proportional to the stiffness of the composite. Many people will confuse stiffness with strength, however the differentiation between them is not the object of this paper. What we do need to know is that when most people think of composite parts as strong they are thinking about how stiff they are, how they resist a change from an applied force. While actual manufactured thickness of a composite is more complicated than simple addition, depending on manufacturing methods, resin uptake by the fabric, mold surface imperfections etc. we can get a good ball back using known values and simple math to arrive at a reasonable answer. In order to do this in the application the user can select from a dropdown list of common carbon fiber fabrics. This utilizes the spinner layout and these text items are stored in an array in an XML file (“Spinners:Android Developers”,n.d.). This allows us to add additional fabrics for updates very easily. From here each text value shown in the spinner will need to be associated with its thickness value. This is readily available information provided on material data sheets from either the manufacturer or supplier. With each spinner view on this layout there will be an associated edit text field for the user to enter the number of layers of each fabric. When the user changes the fabric type in the spinner and the program accepts it, a toast message will briefly show to confirm to the user an action has happened. In order to calculate the materials and thickness no prior knowledge of the order of the fabrics is needed just the quantities of each. To get a total thickness the program will perform the math of (associated fabric thickness of fabric 1 * number of layer of that type) +  (associated fabric thickness of fabric 2 * number of layers of that type) + …(...). This calculation should run when the user presses a calculate button that is on screen and should reset when the user presses a reset button on the screen. While these are not implemented in the draft application the above description shows the functions that will be needed in order to make them function. Two more additional edit text fields will be incorporated, one for the user to enter in a simple width and one for the length. This will be used in a separate calculation and will not be required for calculating thickness.
The button feature on this screen will need to have there  onCreate and appropriate call to actionListener  methods added to the activity class where applicable to get them to operate correctly, The results will show in its own fragment and display the total thickness of the material. It will also suggest the amount of epoxy required for a wet layup method and an estimated total weight of the part being made. These values will only be available if the user enters in the length and width as mentioned above and are not required to use the thickness calculation or to view this fragment. This calculation will be done in the background to the user, an industry standard estimate for epoxy density and the area calculated from the user will be used in this calculation. 
The Orders Page
	Another activity that will be helpful to users of this calculator is an orders page. This will have a simple text header along with a button that takes the user to an external website(s). Currently, there are three options to choose from to give a sense of the layout, however only Envision Composites is functional. In order to accomplish this we can use the webview features built into Android Studio (“WebView: Android Developers.” n.d.). The website should be a reputable composites supplier. This should be helpful to users because when working with composites most of the time you do not want an expensive computer around, however most people will still have their mobile devices on their persons. This makes ordering more materials easier when you have your work right in front of you. This activity will have its own xml layout as well. In order for this process to work properly, some permissions will need to be added/changed in the manifest file to allow the app access to the internet. This is easily accomplished by  There is no need to overcomplicate this page, few text discripers and a well placed button as well as the functional back button will suffice for this section of the application. The advantage of this way of placing an order is that since it is taking you to an external site where the company themselves will have their own payment securities in place there is no need to complicate this app with login screens, storing usernames and passwords and making sure there are secure payment methods on this site. 


Future Development
	One set of features I would like to add into this app is currently more of an idea rather than a firm actionable concept. This activity would be for actual strength calculation. This poses several challenges that I am unsure could fit on a mobile screen or are even possible given my skill set. The difficulty in this comes in several different forms. On the layout side of this there would need to be a large amount of user inputs on a screen. Having the right text size and scrolling down past several different layouts, radio buttons, and text fields will take something that is already complicated and potentially add in a high level of user confusion and frustration. In my experience this has been the experience with full blow desktop software on a full screen, the problems only become more frustrating on a smaller screen. This issue is not one that is hardware related in that the mobile device would have issues rendering the display rather just too much going on. In order to simplify it and have a user friendly interface large sacrifices in calculations and assumptions would have to be made possibly making this whole section useless. This certainly can be solved however, large amounts of time (for one individual) would be required to implement and test this in a usable way. The second issue is the complex math that is involved with calculating the strength of a composite. Creating the matrix for these along with setting up the appropriate trigonometry functions is beyond the scope of my java programming abilities. While the math isn't necessarily overly complicated handling different size matrices and array values in the code can quickly get convoluted. One possible solution would be to use some other well known math extension or perhaps link users to popular math sites like WolframAlpha. This would certainly be a great challenge for me at the moment but would almost certainly be a unique experience unlike any other out there at least on a mobile platform and could be great for future development.
	Overall the composites calculator is a simple application that doesn't require complex layouts or intense graphic design. The solution for this problem should be one that is simple, effective and utilitarian. It has the foundations to function in the most basic aspect of what it should be able to do and also has the potential to be an incredibly powerful tool.
	
	












References
Building web apps in WebView: Android Developers. (2020, January 22). Retrieved August 26, 2020, from https://developer.android.com/guide/webapps/webview
Spinners:Android Developers. (2020, August 17). Retrieved August 26, 2020, from https://developer.android.com/guide/topics/ui/controls/spinner
Tamada, R. (2017, July 12). How to implement Android Splash Screen. Retrieved August 25, 2020, from https://www.androidhive.info/2013/07/how-to-implement-android-splash-screen-2/

